

HISTORICAL MONOGRAPH


 
The source of the web document 
U.S. ARMY ORDNANCE
 "HISTORICAL MONOGRAPH, 
ELECTRONIC COMPUTERS WITHIN THE ORDNANCE CORPS"
dated November 1961
 was provided by
 Computer History Museum

The document was donated to the museum, and scanned to TIFF format by
 "Jake" Feinler.
The conversion (OCRing, HTMLing, checking, ...)
was done by Ed Thelen.
Some OCRing errors probably remain, some spelling errors and transpositions
in the original text were corrected during checking. Access to the 
original images is provided on a page-by-page basis by clicking the "TIF version" on
each page.  (*** The TIFF files for the first chapter only are currently provided. ***)

Highlights  include the history and technical descriptions of ENIAC, 
EDVAC,  ORDVAC, BRLESC and a
  computer tree with enlargements.
Speed ratings and 
costs of many computers of the era are included.
A glossary is also provided.

 If you have comments or suggestions, 
	Send e-mail to Ed Thelen

Go to Antique Computer home page,
Go to On-line Documents







 Click here for TIF version of this page

 







HISTORICAL MONOGRAPH 
 
ELECTRONIC COMPUTERS 
 
WITHIN THE ORDNANCE CORPS 


November 1961




 
 Karl Kempf 

Historical Officer

Aberdeen Proving Ground, Maryland





 Click here for TIF version of this page

 


PREFACE




	This historical monograph covers the pioneer efforts and subsequent
contributions of the U. S. Army Ordnance Corps in the field of automatic
electronic computing systems during the period 1942 through 1961.

	No comprehensive history of electronic computers within the U. S. Army
Ordnance Corps had previously been compiled and for this reason the sources 
for
this monograph were many and varied. In general, however, these sources 
consisted
of books (i. e. open literature), computer manuals, reports, interviews, 
and data
prepared especially for this monograph by personnel of the Computing 
Laboratory,
Ballistic Research Laboratories, Aberdeen Proving Ground, Maryland.

	Mr. Martin H. Weik, Technical Staff Assistant, Computing Laboratory, BRL,
assisted the author during the entire course of preparation of the 
monograph and
supplied much of the information used in its compilation. Mr. Weik also 
prepared
The Computer Tree which is included in Chapter VII.





 Click here for TIF version of this page

 


TABLE OF CONTENTS


.	Page
Introduction -		1
Chapter	I. - Pre-electronic Computing Devices	6
Chapter	II. - ENIAC	19
Chapter III.- EDVAC	40
Chapter	IV.- ORDVAC	62
Chapter	V.- BRLESC	80
Chapter	VI.- Computers For Solving Gunnery Problems	
		89
Chapter VII.- The Computer Tree	96
.	.
Appendix 1. - Technical Data of ENIAC, From BRL Report	
		No. 1115, March 1961 	98
Appendix	11. - Technical Data of EDVAC, From BRL Report	
		No. 1115, March 1961 	100
Appendix III. - Technical Data of ORDVAC, From BRL Report		
		No. 1115, March 1961	104
Appendix	IV. - Technical Data of BRLESC, From BRL Report	
		No.1115, March 1961	110
Appendix		V. - Inventory of Computers Within the U. S.	
		Army Ordnance Corps - FY 1961	113
Appendix VI. -	Arithmetic Operation Time (Including Access) of Computing
	Systems - from BRL Report No. 1115, March 1961	
		 118
Appendix VII. -	Approximate Cost of Computing Systems (basic or Typical
	Systems - from BRL Report No. 1115, March 1961	
		 122
Appendix Vlll. - Glossary of Computer Engineering and 
	Programming Terminology - Partial List from
	BRL Report No. 1115, March 1961	124
Appendix IX. - Bibliography	 138.







  Ord. Mono. 1961, INTRODUCTION , starting page 001
Click here for TIF version of this page
 

 

 




INTRODUCTION


	It is quite well known that the United States Army Ordnance Corps has made
many significant contributions to both science and industry. Of all its
contributions however, few can match the importance of the Ordnance Corps' 
pioneer efforts in the field of electronic computers.  In the interest of 
national defense, the development of electronic computing systems could not wait until normal
economic laws brought about the supply of systems through commercial demand.
Therefore, recognizing the urgent need for such computers, the Ordnance 
Corps initiated the development work and supplied the funds that led to the first 
high-speed, electronic, automatic computer. This computer, called the ENIAC 
(Electronic Numerical Integrator And Computer), was proposed in 1942 and completed in 
1946.

	The installation of the ENIAC in 1947 in the Ballistic Research Laboratories
at Aberdeen Proving Ground, Maryland, marked the beginning of the 
widespread use of
electronic computing machines. Since the advent of the ENIAC, a large 
expansion has
taken place in the computer field. Investment rates in computing equipment 
in the
United States rose from ten million dollars per year in 1953 to one hundred 
million
dollars per year in 1956. Present (1961) expenditures for computing 
equipment has
passed the billion dollars per year mark.

	Electronic computers find wide use throughout the Department of Defense and
many other government agencies. Almost every commodity industry such as oil,
steel, and rubber is utilizing computing equipment




 
  Ord. Mono. 1961, INTRODUCTION , starting page 002
 Click here for TIF version of this page

 
 


for both scientific and commercial applications. Service industries,
such as banking, transportation, and insurance have applied large scale
computing systems toward the solution of problems in the fields of accounting, 
reservations control, and bookkeeping. Manufacturers have
used computing systems for design engineering and scientific research.
Many systems are being utilized for inventory and stock control. The determination 
of manufacturing plant location and stock parts storage are
being made by linear programming methods. Electronic computers are used
by the construction industry for design and location of structures and
road nets. Many digital computers form a part of closed loop industrial
process control systems. Where the processing of large quantities of
data are necessary, computing systems are invaluable.

	It must be left for the historian of the future to accurately evaluate
the effect of automatic computing machines on man's destiny. It is yet
too early to make even a good guess. However, one thing is certain:
electronic computers have ushered in a change equal to that of the Industrial 
Revolution. By the harnessing of mechanical power (steam engine,
etc.) man was able to perform work beyond the capacity of his own muscles
(or that of beasts of burden) and his world changed as a result. He
could travel at speeds undreamed of in earlier times, he could fabricate
structures never before possible, and he could build machinery to perform
intricate work and produce large quantities of consumer goods at low cost.
By the development of machinery for handling information and thus enabling







  Ord. Mono. 1961, INTRODUCTION , starting page 003
 Click here for TIF version of this page

 
 



decisions to be made automatically by mechanizing the logic of mental 
process, man
is now able to perform mental work beyond the capacity of his brain. Many 
problems
that have remained unsolved for years because the calculations were too 
formidable
for a human to perform can now be handled by electronic computers. Aircraft 
design,
ballistic crystallography, electron optics, astronomy, pure mathematics, and
weather forecasting are just a few of the activities in which automatic 
computing
machines are and will continue to play ever increasingly important roles.

	At this point it might be well to consider the question; "What is an 
automatic
computer?" An automatic computer is a machine so constructed that it can 
perform a
complicated sequence of arithmetical and logical operations at high speeds, 
without
human intervention or assistance. The present-day automatic computers 
utilize
electronic circuits as the major operating components and are capable of 
computing
speeds of the order of a few millimicroseconds per logical decision. We can 
properly
refer to this class of machines as high-speed electronic automatic 
computers.

	It is the term "automatic", however, that designates the most important
characteristic of the modern electronic computer. This is its ability to 
guide and
control itself during the course of its data processing action. The human 
operator
is needed only to set up and start the machine, which can then operate 
without human
intervention, guidance, or direction. However, the machine is 
self-directing only
within definite prescribed limits which must be predetermined by the 
operator during
the setup of the machine and during programming.





  Ord. Mono. 1961, INTRODUCTION , starting page 004
 Click here for TIF version of this page

 
 



	Automatic computers perform many operations which previously were
done only by human labor and this has led some writers to refer to
 automatic computers as "giant brains". They definitely are not electronic
brains and do not "think" in the creative sense of the word. A human mind
must first determine a way of solving the problem and then instruct the
computer how to solve the problem when given the data. The human operation
of preparing the instructions for the automatic computer is called 
programming, and the resulting set of instructions is called a program or a
routine. Without a program, an automatic computer cannot perform any
data processing.

	All computers, whether mechanical or electronic, can be divided into
two distinct classes, depending on the form in which information is handled.
If the information is handled in the form of letters or digits they are
classed as digital computers. If the information is handled in the form
of an electrical equivalent of physical variables, they are classed as
analog computers. Analog computers may also represent numerical quantities 
by such physical variables as translation, rotation, voltage, or resistance. 
The slide rule and the antiaircraft predictor are examples of
analog computers. The digital computer utilizes numbers in a given scale
of notation to represent all the quantities that occur in a problem or a
calculation. The abacus and the desk calculator are examples of digital
computers.

	In a very general way it can be said that the advantages of the 





  Ord. Mono. 1961, INTRODUCTION , starting page 005
 Click here for TIF version of this page

 
 


digital computer compared to the analog computer, are its greater flexibility 
and
greater precision, while its disadvantages are its higher cost and greater
complexity.


	More and more emphasis is being placed on the digital computer although 
there
are still some applications where the analog computer is desirable. 
Throughout the
Ordnance Corps the digital computer is the one most widely used for the 
various
Ordnance applications. The analog computer finds use primarily in the older
antiaircraft and antimissile fire control devices.


	The importance of automatic computers to the U. S. Army Ordnance Corps is 
well
illustrated by the extensive use of various types of computers at Ordnance 
Corps
installations. An inventory of computers within the Ordnance Corps for the 
Fiscal
Year 1961 lists a total of 112 computers of 36 different types in use at 26 
Ordnance
Corps installations.1


	At Aberdeen Proving Ground, for example, the Computing Laboratory has a
personnel strength representing 12% of the total personnel of the 
Ballistic, Research
Laboratories. The Computing Laboratory employs 122 persons. These include: 
51
Mathematicians; 15 Electronics Engineers; 4 Tabulating Equipment Operators; 
38
Maintenance and Supporting personnel; and 14 military.

 



  Ord. Mono. 1961, CHAPTER I, starting page 006
 Click here for TIF version of this page

 
 




	CHAPTER I

PRE-ELECTRONIC COMPUTING DEVICES



	The first high-speed electronic automatic computer, the ENIAC, was put into
operation at Aberdeen Proving Ground in 1947 and introduced an era of
possibilities never before available to the field of computation. It was 
one of
the most significant developments of our time because it enabled us to 
expand our
knowledge in almost every field through limitless quantities of accurate,
inexpensive computation performed at high speeds.


	Prior to the advent of the ENIAC, however, were thousands of years of
development to produce devices which could remove the drudgery of 
computation. The
very first requirement was the invention of a means to record numbers. 
Various means
were used in early times to do this. The Hebrews, Greeks and Romans, for 
example,
used the letters of their alphabets to represent numbers, but these systems 
did not
lend themselves to easy computation of mathematical problems. Anyone 
familiar, with
the Roman numeral system can imagine the difficulty in multiplying CCXVII 
by XXIX to get MMMMMMCCXC111.


	In spite of clumsy systems of recording numbers Egyptians, Greeks and Romans
were nonetheless able to perform computations. A method of finger 
computation evolved
and at some time prior to 600 B. C. an ingenious calculating device, the 
abacus, was
developed and used by them. This calculating device employed a place system 
and was
built around the base ten. Strangely enough it seems never to have occurred 
to those
people




  Ord. Mono. 1961, CHAPTER I, starting page 007
 Click here for TIF version of this page

 
 


to write numerals in this same system. That idea was to come many years 
later from India.


	The Roman-type abacus found its way to the Orient around the twelfth century
A.D. and today it still remains the principal means of computing in China 
and Japan.
It is a simple device and a skilled operator can add, subtract, multiply 
and divide
with amazing speed. In fact, the champion abacus operator of Japan some 
years ago
defeated a man using an electric calculating machine. The achievement of 
such speed
and accuracy on the abacus, however, requires considerable training, which 
is one
disadvantage of the abacus.


	The modern abacus consists of a rectangular frame with a number of rods or
wires. These rods are divided into two unequal portions by a transverse 
bar. On the
upper, smaller portion of each rod are two beads and on the lower portion 
five beads.
(The modern Japanese abacus has one bead above and four beads below the 
bar.) The
whole acts as a numerical register, each rod representing a decimal order 
as in our
familiar "Arabic" notation.


	The chief disadvantage of the abacus is that the operator must perform his
calculations mentally. The device merely stores his results step by step. 
It does not
perform the actual calculations as does the modern desk calculator.


	As mentioned previously, in spite of the use of the abacus by the Greeks and
Romans the Western peoples did not develop a convenient system of 
numeration. This was
accomplished by Hindu scholars nearly two thousand




  Ord. Mono. 1961, CHAPTER I, starting page 008
 Click here for TIF version of this page

 
 


	
years ago. They developed the symbols and the place system which enables us 
to
express any number, no matter how large or small it may be. This system is 
easy to
learn and simple to use. It is built around the base ten, although any 
number
might have been used. It is possible that the base of ten was selected 
because man
had always used his fingers for counting.


	The Hindu numerals with their place system were carried westward by 
merchants
and scholars and finally reached Spain in the tenth century. However it was 
not until
the fifteenth century that they finally prevailed, in the Western World and 
took their
present form 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9. This development opened the 
door to modern
mathematics.


	Around 1600 John Napier, a Scottish mathematician, invented logarithms and 
also
prepared a convenient multiplication table on pieces of wood or bone. 
"Napier's bone",
as they were called, had no practical value but his logarithms did. Around 
1632
William Oughtred in England made the first slide rule by inscribing 
logarithms on wood
or ivory. The slide rule is an analog computer which is still widely used by
scientists and engineers throughout the entire world.


	Shortly after Napier's achievements, around 1642, Blaise Pascal in France
constructed an adding machine that resembled the modern desk calculator. 
This machine
consisted of a series of ratchet-driven wheels with the numbers 0 to 9 on 
them.
Although it was a simple device and could only add and subtract it embodied 
one very
important development which




  Ord. Mono. 1961, CHAPTER I, starting page 009
 Click here for TIF version of this page

 
 


is an
essential part of the digital computing technique, namely a means of making 
the
"carry over" into an automatic process. It also indicated the possibility of
multiplying numbers by successive addition. For the first time a machine 
was built
that approached automatic computing because it removed a function from the 
operator
to the machine.


	In 1671 Gottfried Leibnitz, in Germany, invented the stepped-wheel, a
cylindrical drum having nine teeth of increasing length along its surface. 
When the
drum was rotated, a gear sliding on an axis parallel to that of the drum 
engaged some
of the teeth, thereby undergoing a corresponding number of rotation steps. 
The
Leibnitz wheel made it possible to multiply quickly by repeated additions. 
From then
onwards a variety of improved calculating machines were devised, all based 
on the
original idea of wheels moved around in steps, and by the nineteenth century
commercial models began to appear. The Thomas machine (France) embodied this
principle and, starting in 1822, was the first to be manufactured for 
widespread use.
It was a dependable, crank-operated, four-process machine. In 1885 
Burroughs, in the
United States, produced an adding machine and in 1902 the first machine with
completely automatic multiplication and division was built by Rechnitzer, 
also in the
United States. Several machines were designed in various countries and by 
1920, with
the fully automatic Monroe machine, we reach the stage of desk calculators 
familiar
to us in banks, offices and laboratories. These are the machines that do 
most of the
world's computation, the modern ones being electrically driven and assuming 
more and
more of the operator's functions.





  Ord. Mono. 1961, CHAPTER I, starting page 010
 Click here for TIF version of this page

 
 



	These machines, however, are limited in scope and require the constant
attention of a human operator to supply them with numbers and to record on 
paper
the result of each stage of the calculation before proceeding to the next 
one. They
do save time and mental effort but they are not fast enough where very large
quantities of numerical data have to
--be handled. ii must also be noted that they are not true forerunners of 
the modern
electronic computers.


	The principles of modern computers, albeit in mechanical form, were laid 
down by
Charles Babbage in England. Starting in 1812 he attempted to ' build an 
automatic
mechanical calculator. He was familiar with Mullers idea for a difference 
engine
(1786) and Jaques' idea for controlling a loom by means of punched holes 
(1775). He
incorporated both ideas and actually made models of a difference engine 
which was card
controlled. Technical problems of construction were too great for mechanical
engineering of that period and the computer was never finished. Later, 
Babbage
conceived an even more ambitious idea. He worked on the design of an 
analytical
engine, which, had it been built, would have incorporated ideas familiar to 
the modern
digital computer.


	Babbage's new idea was to extend the capabilities of the difference engine 
so
that it could not merely add and print, but also multiply, divide, and call 
for new
data from its human operator. In order for the analytical engine to perform 
the tasks
expected of it, it was necessary to express all the possible instructions 
to the
machine in the form of stereotyped commands. Such a procedure is known as 
the logic or
the logical design




  Ord. Mono. 1961, CHAPTER I, starting page 011
 Click here for TIF version of this page

 
 



 of a
computer, and Babbage's engine was strikingly modern in regard to its 
logical design.
Except for the need of a human attendant to read into the machine values 
from
mathematical tables, this engine was logically parallel to most of the 
recent
automatic computers. Naturally the speed of computation would have been far 
below that
of the modern calculator (it could perform one addition per second), since 
Babbage had
to use the purely mechanical techniques available in his day.


	A significant part of his design for an analytical engine was the use of a
"store" for holding the partial results of arithmetic operations performed 
in what he
called the "mill". To feed numbers into the machine he proposed a system 
using patterns
of holes punched in cards, while the results of calculations were to be 
presented by a
mechanism which would set up the appropriate numerals in type ready for 
printing.
Another proposal was that the engine should be capable of deciding on a 
course of
action in the light of partial results obtained. He called this the 
"control". All
these ideas have become features of the modern digital computer, and it is 
mainly
because of them that our present-day machines are so fast in operation and 
so versatile
in their range of calculations.


	The next important development along this line was made by Hollerith and
Powers during 1880-1890. Working for the United States Census Bureau they 
required
some means of handling large masses of information. This led to the 
development of
the first key punch, the first sorter, and the first tabulator, al) using 
large
punched cards. The patterns of round





  Ord. Mono. 1961, CHAPTER I, starting page 012
 Click here for TIF version of this page

 
 


holes in the cards were formed by using a crude hand-punching device. The 
cards
could be sorted into the series or order wanted, and then tabulated to 
reduce the
census data to manageable form. Hollerith did not use the punched cards to 
control
the course of computation, but simply used the holes in the cards to carry
information. Hollerith and Powers also employed the electromagnetic 
techniques in
their machine, that is, information on the card (hole or no hole) was 
converted
into electric impulses, and the electric impulses actuated devices known as
relays.


	In 1925, at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Dr. Vannevar Bush 
and his
associates began studying the problem of designing a machine to solve 
differential
equations. In 1927, Dr. Bush started work on a mechanical differential 
analyser. He
experimented with mechanisms that would integrate, add, multiply, etc., and 
methods of
connecting them together in a machine. Originally he made use of electrical 
currents
flowing through watt-hour meters, which integrate the electrical power 
absorbed by
circuits attached to them. Later he reverted to the mechanical integrators 
of the
wheel and disc type. A major part of the success of the machine depended on 
a device
whereby a very small turning force would do a rather large amount of work. 
By careful
design of the discs and of the wheel mountings, Dr. Bush was able to make 
the
integrators accurate, and, by introducing torque amplifiers to take the 
loads off the
wheels so that they rotated very freely, he was able to reduce the slippage 
between






  Ord. Mono. 1961, CHAPTER I, starting page 013
 Click here for TIF version of this page

 
 



the wheel and the disc. He combined a frame with the integrators, which
contained movable shafts, changeable gears and couplings, input hand-
wheels and output recording pens for producing a readable result.


	By 1930 the first differential analyser was finished. It was entirely 
mechanical, having no electrical parts except the motors. Its disadvantage 
was the great deal of work required in changing from one problem
to another. This involved undoing old mechanical connections between
shafts and setting up new ones. For this reason the design of a second
analyser was begun in 1935, on which all connections could be made electrically.


	As early as 1932 personnel of the Ballistic Section at Aberdeen Proving 
Ground had investigated the possible use of the Differential Analyser
for ballistic computations. The machine was used to compute numerous
trajectories including a set sufficient for the preparation of a complete
range table. (t was also tested on interior ballistic problems. A careful
 study and evaluation of the results of this investigation led to the
following conclusions:

	 Such a machine could be built at Aberdeen Proving Ground.
	  The machine could perform various kinds of ballistic computations
with the necessary accuracy.

	  Operation and maintenance would require no unusual skill.
	  The speed of the machine was such that it would insure greatly
increased output of work by the Ballistic Section in any emergency.






  Ord. Mono. 1961, CHAPTER I, starting page 014
 Click here for TIF version of this page

 
 

	 	It could perform routine work at a smaller total expenditure of
funds.
	 	Its use in the preparation of range tables would replace numerous
complicated and indirect methods by simple, uniform and direct process.
	 	Its use would permit the investigation of various problems, the
solution of which was necessary to any advance in ballistic theory or
practice but which previously could not be studied because existing methods
required a prohibitive amount of computing labor.



	It was decided to use the Bush Differential Analyser at Aberdeen Proving 
Ground
and its installation was completed in 1935. After final adjustment and 
trials it
was used in the computation of two firing tables. These were completed with
gratifying results by mid 1936.


	The Bush Differential Analyser, an analog device, was installed under the
direction of Major James Guion, who was in charge of the Ballistic 
Computing Section
at Aberdeen Proving Ground at that time. Major Guion had been quick to 
realize the
value of this continuous variable calculator to the Computational needs of 
the
Ordnance Department. The Availability   of this machine and the 
experience that
was gained in its use were invaluable to the Ordnance Department during the 
crucial
transition period prior to America's entry into World War 11.


	The analyser installed at APG had ten integrating units and provisions for
two input and two output tables. However, despite its value





  Ord. Mono. 1961, CHAPTER I, starting page 015
 Click here for TIF version of this page

 
 


as
an important mechanical aid to computation it had certain limitations. The 
torque
amplifier, for example, although simple in mechanical design, frequently 
failed
toward the end of a long trajectory run with the loss of the preceding 
computation
and an appreciable delay associated with its repair. This type of failure 
and the
interference that it caused with the carrying out of computations at the 
Ballistic
Research Laboratory led to extensive study to overcome this problem.


	At the outbreak of World War II in Europe the officer in charge of ballistic
computations at APG was. Lt. P. N. Gillon. He immediately recognized the 
immensity of
the task that would fall upon the Ordnance Department in the event of 
United States
participation in the war and this prompted him to seek both marked 
improvement in
mechanical aids to computation and augmented facilities for its 
accomplishment. A
number of very important things were undertaken to accomplish this purpose.


	The Moore School of Electrical Engineering of the University of 
Pennsylvania had
a Bush Differential Analyser of somewhat larger capacity than the one at 
Aberdeen
Proving Ground. It had fourteen integrating units instead of ten. Therefore 
the
Ordnance Department awarded a contract to the University of Pennsylvania 
for the
utilization of this device. Several additional contracts were later awarded 
to the
University to carry out different phases of the increasingly important role 
which it
was to play in the computation activities of the Ordnance Department during 
the war.





  Ord. Mono. 1961, CHAPTER I, starting page 016
 Click here for TIF version of this page

 
 



	Lt. P. N. Gillon, in his capacity as officer in charge of ballistic
computations, conferred frequently with Dean Pender, Professor Brainerd, 
and their
associates at the Moore School in order to effect proper coordination of the
computational work at the two localities, Philadelphia and Aberdeen. There 
was a
very talented group at the Moore School under the direction of Professor 
Brainerd
and as a result of Lt. Gillon's discussions with them Assistant Professor 
Weygand
undertook to develop an electronic torque amplifier to replace the 
mechanical
torque amplifiers on the Bush Differential Analysers. This work was 
eminently
successful and, in addition, photoelectric followers were developed by the 
Moore
School group for both the input and output tables of the analyser. As a 
result of
these accomplishments the productive capacity of the analysers at both the 
Moore
School and Aberdeen Proving Ground were enhanced by at least an order of
magnitude.


	During World War II the Bush Differential Analyser was used primarily to
compute trajectories for firing tables and to prepare trajectory charts for 
use with
UT fuzes. The machine could compute a 60-second trajectory in about 15 
minutes,
whereas a human operator using a desk calculator required about 20 hours to 
perform
the same computation. Its value to the Ordnance Department during the war 
years was
tremendous.


	The next major development, prior to the advent of the high-speed electronic
automatic computer, came in 1944 when Howard Aiken, in cooperation with 
some IBM
engineers and some graduate students at Harvard University, completed the 
Mark I
Relay Computer, also called the Automatic  Sequence-Controlled Calculator.


	



  Ord. Mono. 1961, CHAPTER I, starting page 017
 Click here for TIF version of this page

 
 



	This machine performed thousands of calculating steps, one after another,
according to a scheme fixed ahead of time. Its individual operations were
automatic, once the punched tape fixing the chain of operations had been 
put on
the machine, and it was sequence-controlled, since control over the 
sequence of
its operations was built into the machine.
	The principle of operation of the Mark I Relay Computer was 
electromechanical.
It combined the two applications of the concept of state, that is, the 
information
for processing was represented by patterns of open and closed relays (like 
the
patterns of holes and no holes which Babbage used).
	Although the machine was efficient, fast, and capable of solving a variety
of problems its speed could not approach that of the electronic computer, 
which
is the next state in the development of computers and the subject of this
monograph. Nevertheless, it holds a permanent place in the history of 
development
of calculating machines, since it was the first automatic machine to be
completed. 



   BRL at APG used two types of relay computers during 1947-1954. Two 
IBM Relay
Calculators were used for a short time but were not successful. Two Bell 
Relay
Computers were used. They were accurate, but slow and required expert 
maintenance.
Oust and humidity adversely affected their operation. However many useful 
results were
obtained from the twin Bell Relay Computers during many years of successful 
operation.
One good feature of the Bell Relay Machines was that they would run 16 hours
overnight, unattended. A problem regularly would be placed on the computer 
at 4:00 PM.
The next morning, arriving operating personnel would find the problem 
solved and the
machine waiting, or the machine still feverishly running the problem to a





  Ord. Mono. 1961, CHAPTER I, starting page 018
 Click here for TIF version of this page

 
 


successful conclusion. Many times, if it was felt that the machines would 
complete
a problem during the night, a new problem was set before the machine for it 
to
tackle until personnel arrived the next morning. This mode of operation 
increased
the productivity of the computers with a minimum of personnel. Of course, 
once in
a while a dirty relay would cause a stoppage, for the Bell A and the Bell B 
would
either run without error or not run at all.





  Go 	forward -> next chapter
 If you have comments or suggestions, 
	Send e-mail to Ed Thelen

Go to Antique Computer home page,
Go to On-line Documents



