

antikythera1-1






The Antikythera Mechanism I
With Java animations by Bill Casselman

This page has been translated into Czech.
This page has been translated into Latvian.
This page has been translated into Slovak
This page has been translated into Russian

  

The main reference for these columns is printed: the monograph,
cited below, by the famous Yale historian of science Derek
De Solla Price (other printed references).
On the web one can find the complete text of his 1959 Scientific American
article on the subject. E. C. Zeeman, K.B., F.R.S. delivered lectures
on the topic in 1998 at the University of Texas, San Antonio and
at Trinity College, Dublin. The 23 transparencies from these lectures are on the web and it's
almost like being there (see his paper for
more detail). DivingBum Enterprises has a 
page with a photograph of the curent installation in the National
Museum of Archaeology, Athens. Chris Rorres' page
Spheres and Planetaria on the Drexel University site has a nice photograph
of Price himself. Rob S. Rice of the University of Pennsylvania has
posted a very useful paper
on the subject, from a 1995 U.S. Naval Academy symposium on Naval History.
A lively sketch of De Solla Price's scientific and human personality
can be found in the Foreword, by Robert K. Merton and Eugene Garfield, to one of his 
books.
Update: Technology available to Tony Freeth and his collaborators, including computed X-ray tomography (like a high-resolution CAT-scan), has allowed a much better understanding of the structure of the mechanism and has shown that earlier work by Price, while correctly assessing the intellectual scale of the Greek's achievement, was dead wrong on many of the details. Read about some of the discoveries made in 2009 here.
1. The history of the Mechanism

The Antikythera Mechanism is the name given to an astronomical
calculating device, measuring about 32 by 16 by 10 cm,
which was discovered in 1900 in a sunken ship just off the coast
of Antikythera, an island between Crete and the Greek mainland.
Several kinds of evidence point incontrovertibly to around 80 B.C. 
for the date of the shipwreck. The device, made of bronze gears
fitted in a wooden case, was crushed in the wreck, and parts of
the faces were lost, "the rest then being coated with a hard
calcareous deposit at the same time as the metal corroded away
to a thin core coated with hard metallic salts preserving much
of the former shape of the bronze" during the almost 2000 years
it lay submerged. The quotation is from Derek de Solla Price's
monograph Gears from the Greeks ...  in the 1974 Transactions
of the American Philosophical Society (Volume 64, part 7).



General plan of all gearing, composite
diagram from De Solla Price, Transactions of the American 
Philosophical
Society Vol 64 No 7 (1974). Reproduced with permission. 


It is hard to exaggerate the singularity of this device, or
its importance in forcing a complete re-evaluation of what had
been believed about technology in the ancient world. For this box 
contained some 32 gears, assembled into a mechanism that accurately
reproduced the motion of the sun and the moon against the 
background of fixed stars, with a differential giving 
their relative position and hence the phases of the moon. It is
enough to know that there is no trace of anything like it until
around 1000 A.D., and that when it was first published there were
serious suggestions that it had been dropped into the wreck at
a much later date or even that it was the
work of alien astronauts.
The general plan of the gearing could only be drawn after 1971
when, on De Solla Price's instigation, the remnants of the
mechanism were viewed with gamma rays, which could penetrate
the calcareous block in which the gears were embedded. Then
careful counting of teeth, and examination of the way the
gears meshed, showed that "the gear ratios could be associated
with well-known astronomical and calendrical parameters" (Price)
and allowed the almost complete description of how the device
must have functioned.

This is the first of two columns on the Antikythera Mechanism. In
each we will examine one part of the mechanism that has special
mathematical interest. This month it is the Sun-Moon assembly,
next month: the Differential Gear.





--Tony Phillips
SUNY at Stony Brook



1. The history of the
Mechanism
2. Pictures of a Mechanism
3. The Sun-Moon Assembly
4. Gear ratios and continued fractions
References



Comments: webmaster@ams.org
© copyright 2000, American Mathematical Society.

















